#LyX 1.4.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 245
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass book
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\papersize a4paper
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 2
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 2
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes true
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
Writing METHODs
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{cha:methods}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this chapter we describe a methodology (pun intended) which can help
 make anyone who can solve a quadratic equation a mathematical modeling
 expert.
 This methodology helps you to avoid mistakes and to find mistakes quickly
 when you make them.
 Finding bugs weeks after creating a model is annoying, inefficient, and
 (frequently) embarrassing.
 Because METHOD code can be large, we do not include many examples here.
 
\begin_inset Note Note
status collapsed

\begin_layout Standard
See ***vessel something*** for detailed examples
\end_layout

\end_inset

 One of the advantages of this methodology is that it allows almost automatic
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{methods, automatic generation}

\end_inset

 generation of methods for a model based on the declarative structure (defined
 parts and variables) in the model, as we shall see in Section\InsetSpace ~

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:methods.automation}

\end_inset


\noun off
.
 Even if you skip much of this chapter, read 
\noun default
Section\InsetSpace ~

\noun off

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:methods.automation}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We divide methods into 
\family typewriter
_self
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
_all
\family default
 categories.
 The premise of our approach to design methods is that we can write the
 
\family typewriter
_self
\family default
 methods incrementally, building on the already tested methods of previous
 MODEL parts we are reusing.
 In this way we never have to write a single huge method that directly manipulat
es the hundreds of variables that are in the model hierarchy.
 Were that all there was to it, things would actually be pretty simple.
 However, in ASCEND, one can also select to solve any part of an ASCEND
 model (in particular, any part that is an instance of a single type), and
 this capability complicates method writing - but not by much if we really
 understand the approach we advocate here.
 As an example, suppose we have a flowsheet that has a reactor followed
 by a flash unit in it.
 In ASCEND, we can select to solve the entire flowsheet, only the reactor,
 only the flash unit or even any one of the streams in it (yes, each stream
 has physical property calculations that belong to it making it interesting
 to isolate and solve).
 Should we choose to solve only the flash unit, ASCEND will isolate the
 equations defining the flash - including the equations we use when defining
 the input and output streams to it as they are a part of the flash unit.
 But the input to the flash is also the output from the reactor and is a
 part of the reactor, too.
 Each part would typically take the prime responsibility for supplying methods
 that will set fix flags, set nominal values, etc., for its variables, but
 who owns the variables they both share such as in the connecting stream?
 By 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

tradition
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in chemical engineering flowsheet modeling, we will assert that the reactor
 has prime responsibility for its output stream.
 If we are solving the entire flowsheet, it should set the flags, etc., for
 its output stream.
 However, when we isolate the flash for solving, the flash unit must assume
 responsibility to set fix flags, nominal values, etc., for the output stream
 from the reactor as that stream is its input stream.
 The 
\family typewriter
_all
\family default
 methods allow us to handle these shared variables correctly when we isolate
 a part for solving by itself.
\begin_inset Note Note
status collapsed

\begin_layout Standard
This needs more explanation: I don't find it completely clear.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Usually discovery of the information you need to write the methods proceeds
 in the order that they appear below: 
\family typewriter
check
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
default
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
bound
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
scale
\family default
.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Why use standardised methods on models?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the present chapter, we are proposing that you use a particular standardised
 set of methods on your models.
 While ASCEND doesn't force you to follow these conventions, we hope that
 you will 
\emph on
choose
\emph default
 to follow them, because:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
You models will be more portable.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
They will integrate better with the existing model library when composing
 larger models composed of smaller perhaps pre-existing models.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Other users will be be more easily able to understand what you have built.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
The proposed structure has, in our experience, made for models that are
 easier to debug.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There will be cases where these standard methods don't suffice for your
 needs; these are just proposals for a useful starting point and shared-use
 conventions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Note that if you do not write the standard methods, your MODEL will inherit
 the ones given in the library 
\family typewriter
basemodel.a4l
\family default
.
 The 
\family typewriter
ClearAll
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
reset
\family default
 methods here will work for you if you follow the guidelines for the method
 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
.
 The other methods defined in 
\family typewriter
basemodel.a4l
\family default
 
\family typewriter
(check_self
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
default_self
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
bound_self
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
scale_self
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
check_all
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
default_all
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
bound_all
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
scale_all
\family default
) all contain 
\family typewriter
STOP
\family default
 statements that will warn you that you have skipped something important,
 should you accidentally call one of these methods.
 If you create a model for someone else and they run into one of these 
\family typewriter
STOP
\family default
 errors while using your model, that error is your fault.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Methods *_self
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{methods, \_self}

\end_inset

 VS *_all
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{methods, \_all}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When you create a model definition, you create a container holding variables,
 equations, arrays, and other models.
 You create methods in the same definition to control the state of (the
 values stored in) all these parts.
 ASCEND lets you share objects among several models by passing objects through
 a model interface (the 
\family typewriter
MODEL
\family default
 parameter list), by creating ALIASES
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{ALIASES}

\end_inset

 for parts within contained objects, and even by merging parts (though merging
 should be avoided for any object larger than a variable).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Marginal
status collapsed

\begin_layout Standard
Too many cooks
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{cooks}

\end_inset

 spoil the broth
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{broth}

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\end_inset

The problem this creates for you as a 
\family typewriter
METHOD
\family default
 writer is to decide which of the several 
\family typewriter
MODEL
\family default
s that share an object is responsible for updating that variable's default,
 bounds, and nominal values.
 You could decide that every model which shares a variable is responsible
 for these values.
 This decision will lead to many, many, many hard to understand conflicts
 as different models all try to manage the same value.
 And, the last one run will in fact have the final say.
 But it is difficult to know always which is the last one run.
 The sensible approach is to make only one model responsible for the bounding,
 scaling, and default setting of each variable: 
\emph on
the model that creates the variable in the first place
\emph default
.
 If you abide by this approach, you will keep things much simpler for yourself.
 And, fortunately, the modeling language makes it pretty clear who has created
 each and every variable - except when merging variables.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Marginal
status collapsed

\begin_layout Standard
Use *_self methods on locally created variables and parts
\end_layout

\end_inset

Consider the following model and creating the 
\family typewriter
*_self
\family default
 methods 
\family typewriter
default_self
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
check_self
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
bound_self
\family default
, and 
\family typewriter
scale_self
\family default
 for it.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code
MODEL selfish(
\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code
    external_var WILL_BE solver_var;
\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code
    out_thingy WILL_BE input_part;
\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code
);
\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code
    my_variable IS_A solver_var;
\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code

\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code
    peek_at_variable ALIASES out_thingy.mabob.cost;
\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code
    my_thingy IS_A nother_part;
\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code
    navel_gaze ALIASES my_thingy.mabob.cost;
\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code
END selfish;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\family typewriter
IS_A
\family default
 statements indicate all the parts we have created in this model: namely,
 the 
\family typewriter
solver_var
\family default
 we call 
\family typewriter
my_variable
\family default
 and the
\family typewriter
 nother_part
\family default
 we call 
\family typewriter
my_thingy
\family default
.
 This model should manage the value of the only variable it creates: 
\family typewriter
my_variable
\family default
.
 The variable, 
\family typewriter
external_var
\family default
, comes in from the outside so some other model has created it and should
 manage it.
 The variables 
\family typewriter
peek_at_variable
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
navel_gaze
\family default
 also are not created here and should not be managed in the 
\family typewriter
*_self
\family default
 methods of 
\family typewriter
selfish
\family default
.
 
\family typewriter
my_thingy.mabob.cost
\family default
 belongs to a part we created.
 We want to default, bound, or scale variables in all parts we create, also,
 so we must call 
\family typewriter
my_thingy.default_self
\family default
 whenever 
\family typewriter
default_self
\family default
 is called for this model.
 Its 
\family typewriter
*_self
\family default
 method should in turn call the 
\family typewriter
*_self
\family default
 method for 
\family typewriter
mabob
\family default
, which should set defaults, bounds and scaling for its variable, 
\family typewriter
cost
\family default
.
 Finally, 
\family typewriter
out_thingy
\family default
 is an input parameter and is not created here; we should not call 
\family typewriter
out_thingy.default_self
\family default
, therefore, as some other model will do so.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Marginal
status collapsed

\begin_layout Standard
Use *_all methods to manage a troublesome part
\end_layout

\end_inset

As noted above, you may choose to isolate any mathematical subproblem in
 a large simulation for debugging or solving purposes.
 When you do this isolation using the Browser and Solver tools, you still
 need to call scaling, bounding, and checking methods for all parts of the
 isolated subproblem, even for those parts that come in from the outside.
 This is easily done by writing 
\family typewriter
*_all
\family default
 methods.
 In the example above, 
\family typewriter
scale_all
\family default
 will scale 
\family typewriter
external_var
\family default
 and call 
\family typewriter
out_thingy.scale_all
\family default
 because these parts are defined using 
\family typewriter
WILL_BE
\family default

\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{WILL\_BE}

\end_inset

 statements.
 Finally
\family typewriter
 scale_all
\family default
 will call its local
\family typewriter
 *_self 
\family default
to do all the normal scaling.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
That's the big picture of 
\family typewriter
*_self
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
*_all
\family default
 methods.
 Each kind of method (bound, scale, default, check) has its own peculiarities,
 which we cover in Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:methods.selfMethods}

\end_inset


\noun off
 and 
\noun default
Section 
\noun off

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:methods.allMethods}

\end_inset

, but they all follow the rules above 
\noun default
and
\noun off
 distinguish among variables and parts defined with 
\family typewriter
\noun default
WILL_BE
\family default
\noun off
 (managed in *
\family typewriter
\noun default
_all
\family default
\noun off
 only), IS_A
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{IS\_A}

\end_inset

 (managed in 
\family typewriter
\noun default
*_self
\family default
\noun off
 only), and 
\family typewriter
\noun default
ALIASES
\family default
\noun off
 (not our responsibility).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
How to write ClearAll
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{ClearAll}

\end_inset

 and reset
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{reset}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Writing these two standard methods in your model is very simple: do nothing.
 You may wish to write alternative 
\family typewriter
reset_*
\family default
 methods as we shall discuss.
 All models inherit these methods from the definitions in 
\family typewriter
basemodel.a4l
\family default
.
 Just so you know, here is what they do.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection

\family typewriter
METHOD ClearAll
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This method finds any variable that is a 
\family typewriter
solver_var
\family default
 or refinement of 
\family typewriter
solver_var
\family default
 and changes the 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 flag on that var to 
\family typewriter
FALSE
\family default
.
 This method only touches the 
\family typewriter
.fixe
\family default
d flags; i.e., it does not change the value of 
\family typewriter
.included
\family default
 flags on relations or return boolean, integer and symbol variables to a
 default value.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection

\family typewriter
METHOD reset
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This method calls 
\family typewriter
ClearAll
\family default
 to bring the model to a standard state with all variables unfixed (free),
 then it calls the user-written specify method to bring the model to a state
 where it has an equal number of variables to calculate and equations to
 solve - i.e., to being 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

square.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Normally you do not need to write this method: your models will inherit
 this one unless you override it (redefine it) in your model.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This standard state is not necessarily the most useful starting state for
 any particular application.
 This method merely establishes a base case the modeler finds to be a good
 starting point.
 As an example, the modeler may elect to set fix variables for the base
 case for a flash unit so it corresponds to an isothermal flash calculation.
 Chemical engineers understand this case and can make changes from it to
 set up other cases, such as an adiabatic flash, relatively easily by setting
 and resetting but one or two
\family typewriter
 .fixed
\family default
 flags.
 There is no one perfect "reset"' for all purposes.
 Other 
\family typewriter
reset_*
\family default
 methods can also be written for particular purposes, if such arise
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Standard
The name of a method, for example 
\family typewriter
reset_someOtherPurpose
\family default
 is a communication tool.
 Please use meaningful names as long as necessary to tell what the method
 does.
 Avoid cryptic abbreviations and hyper-specialized jargon known only to
 you and your three friends when you are naming methods; however, do not
 shy away from technical terms common to the engineering domain in which
 you are modeling.
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
The 
\family typewriter
*_self
\family default

\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{\_self}

\end_inset

 methods
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:methods.selfMethods}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The following methods should be redefined by each reusable library 
\family typewriter
MODEL
\family default
.
 Models that do not supply proper versions of these methods are usually
 very hard to reuse.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection

\family typewriter
METHOD check_self
\family default

\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{check\_self}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One can benefit by writing this method first, though it is run last.
 Just as they taught you in elementary school, always check your work.
 Start by defining criteria for a successful solution that will not be included
 in the equations solved and compute them in this method.
 As you develop your 
\family typewriter
MODEL
\family default
, you should expect to revise the check method from time to time, if you
 are learning anything about the model.
 We frequently change our definition of success when modeling.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When a mathematical model is solved, the assumptions that went into writing
 (deriving) the equations should be checked.
 Usually there are redundant equations available (more than one way to state
 the physics or economics mathematically).
 These should be used to check the particularly tricky bits of the model.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Check that the physical or intuitive (qualitative) relationships among variables
 you expect to hold are true, especially if you have not written such relationsh
ips in terms of inequalities (
\family typewriter
x*z <= y
\family default
) in the 
\family typewriter
MODEL
\family default
 equations.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In some models, checking the variable values against absolute physical limits
 (
\family typewriter
temperature > 0{K}
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
temperature < Tcritical
\family default
, for example) may be all that is necessary or possible.
 Do not check variable values against their 
\family typewriter
.lower_bound
\family default
 or 
\family typewriter
.upper_bound
\family default
, as ASCEND will do this for you.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If a check fails, use a 
\family typewriter
STOP
\family default

\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{STOP}

\end_inset

 statement to notify yourself (or your end-user) that the solution may be
 bogus.
 
\family typewriter
STOP
\family default
 raises an error signal and issues an error message.
 
\family typewriter
STOP
\family default
 normally also stops further execution of the method and returns control
 to a higher level, though there are interactive tools to force method execution
 to continue.
 
\family typewriter
STOP
\family default
 does not cause ASCEND to exit though: just for the method execution to
 halt and for control to return to the user.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection

\family typewriter
METHOD default_self
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{default\_self}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This method should set default values for any variables declared locally
 (
\family typewriter
IS_A
\family default
) to the model.
 If the default value declared for the atom type, of which the variable
 is an instance, is appropriate (and typically it is), then you need not
 set a specific default value here.
 This method also should run
\family typewriter
 default_self
\family default
 on all the complex parts that are declared locally (with 
\family typewriter
IS_A
\family default
) in the model.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This method should not run any methods on model parts that come via 
\family typewriter
WILL_BE
\family default
 in the definition's parameter list.
 This method also should not change the values of variables that are passed
 in through the parameter list.
 Sometimes there will be nothing for this method to do.
 Define it anyway, leaving it empty, so that any writer reusing this model
 as part of a higher level model can safely assume it is there and call
 it without having to know the details.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When a top-level simulation is built by the compiler, this method will be
 run (for the top-level model) at the end of compilation.
 If your model's 
\family typewriter
default_self
\family default
 method does not call the lower-level 
\family typewriter
default_self
\family default
 methods in your model locally-declared (
\family typewriter
IS_A
\family default
) parts, it is quite likely that your model will not solve.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection

\family typewriter
METHOD bound_self
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{bound\_self}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Much of the art of nonlinear physical modeling is in bounding the solution.
 This method should update the bounds on locally defined (
\family typewriter
IS_A
\family default
) variables and 
\family typewriter
(IS_A)
\family default
 defined model parts.
 Updating bounds requires some care.
 For example, the bounds on fractions frequently don't need updating.
 This method should not bound variables passed into the 
\family typewriter
MODEL
\family default
 definition or parts passed into the definition.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A common formula for updating bounds is to define a region around the current
 value of the variable.
 A linear region size formula, as an example, would be:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
x_{bound}=x\pm\Delta\cdot x_{nominal}\label{eq:methods.bound-width}\end{equation}

\end_inset

or, in ASCEND syntax,
\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code
v.upper_bound := v + 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{boundwidth}

\end_inset

boundwidth * v.nominal;
\end_layout

\begin_layout LyX-Code
v.lower_bound := v - boundwidth * v.nominal;
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Care must be taken that such a formula does not move the bounds (particularly
 lower bounds) out so far as to allow non-physical solutions.
 Logarithmic bounding regions are also simple to calculate.
 Here 
\family typewriter
boundwidth
\family default
 is a 
\family typewriter
bound_width
\family default
: it could be a real atom (but 
\series bold
not
\series default
 a 
\family typewriter
solver_var
\family default
) or some value you can use to determine how much "wiggle-room" you want
 to give a solver.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Small powers of 4 and 10 are usually good values of 
\family typewriter
boundwidth
\family default
.
 Too small a boundwidth can cut off the portion of number space where the
 solution is found.
 Too large a bound width can allow solvers to wander for great distances
 in uninteresting regions of the number space.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Standard
We need an example here
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection

\family typewriter
METHOD scale_self
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{scale\_self}

\end_inset


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{ssec:methods.scaleself}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Most nonlinear (and many linear) models cannot be solved without proper
 scaling of the variables.
 
\family typewriter
scale_self
\family default
 should reset the 
\family typewriter
.nominal
\family default
 value on every real variable in need of scaling.
 It should then call the 
\family typewriter
scale_self
\family default
 method on all the locally-defined (
\family typewriter
IS_A
\family default
) parts of the MODEL.
 A proper nominal is one such that you expect at the solution
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
0\leq abs\left(\frac{x}{x_{nominal}}\right)\leq10\label{eq:methods.choiceNominal}\end{equation}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As one is dividing by the nominal value for the variable to establish its
 scaled value, zero is about the worst value you could choose for a nominal
 value.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This method should not change the 
\family typewriter
.nominal 
\family default
values for models and variables that are received through the parameter
 list of the model.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Variables (like fractions), when bounded such that they cannot be too far
 away from 1.0 in magnitude, probably don't need scaling most of the time,
 so long as they they are also bounded away from 0.0.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Some solvers, but not all, will attempt to scale the equations and variables
 by heuristic matrix-based methods.
 This works, but inconsistently; user-defined scaling
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{scaling}

\end_inset

 is generally superior.
 ASCEND makes scaling equations easy to do.
 You scale the variables, which can only be done well by knowing something
 about where the solution is going to be found (by being an engineer, for
 example).
 Then ASCEND can calculate an appropriate equation-scaling by efficient
 symbolic methods.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
The 
\family typewriter
*_all
\family default
 methods
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:methods.allMethods}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection

\family typewriter
METHOD default_all
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{default\_all}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Above we discussed the ability in ASCEND to isolate and solve any part of
 a model that is defined as an instance of a single type requires you initialize
 the arguments to a model that you are isolating.
 This method should run the 
\family typewriter
default_all
\family default
 method on each of the parts received through the parameter list via 
\family typewriter
WILL_BE
\family default
 statements and should give appropriate default values to any variables
 received through the parameter list.
 After these calls and settings have been done, it should then call its
 own 
\family typewriter
default_self
\family default
 to take care of all local defaults.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection

\family typewriter
METHOD check_all
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{check\_all}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When solving only a part of a simulation, it is necessary to check the models
 and variables passed into the part as well as the locally defined parts
 and variables.
 This method should call 
\family typewriter
check_all
\family default
 on the parts received as 
\family typewriter
WILL_BE
\family default
 parameters, then call 
\family typewriter
check_self
\family default
 to check the locally defined parts and equations.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection

\family typewriter
METHOD bound_all
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{bound\_all}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This method should be like 
\family typewriter
bound_self
\family default
 except that it bounds the passed in variables and calls 
\family typewriter
bound_all
\family default
 on the passed in parts.
 It should then call 
\family typewriter
bound_self
\family default
.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection

\family typewriter
METHOD scale_all
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{scale\_all}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This method should be like 
\family typewriter
scale_self
\family default
 above except that it scales the variables received through the parameter
 list and calls 
\family typewriter
scale_all
\family default
 on the passed in parts.
 It should then call 
\family typewriter
scale_self
\family default
 to take care of the local variables and models.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section

\family typewriter
METHOD specify
\family default

\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{specify}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The method 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 sets the 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 flags so an instance of the model is solvable.
 There are two issues involved.
 First, the model must be square - i.e., it must have as many free variables
 as it has eligible equations available to compute them.
 Second, it should be a setting of
\family typewriter
 .fixed
\family default
 flags that the modeler knows will solve numerically.
 This latter requirement requires one to have an intuitive feel for the
 model.
 A chemical engineer will 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

know
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that a flash calculation, where he has fixed both the pressure and the
 vapor fraction, is a pretty robust calculation.
 It would be a good way to set fix flags in the 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method.
 Getting the 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 flags set for a large complex model is one of the hardest tasks ever invented
 by mathematicians if you go about it in the wrong way.
 If you follow the prescription here, getting the right number of flags
 set is almost automatic.
 We have set written the specify methods for a complex hierarchy of models
 correctly the first time using this approach.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We shall illustrate this section by examining the set of models in 
\family typewriter
simple_fs.a4c
\family default
.
 You should find that model in the model directory for ASCEND and open it
 in your favorite text editor.
 This model is for a simple flowsheet comprising a mixer, a reactor, a flash
 unit and a simple stream splitter.
 It contains the following models: 
\family typewriter
mixture
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
molar_stream
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
mixer
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
reactor
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
flash
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
splitter
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
flowsheet
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
controller
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
test_flowsheet
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
test_controller
\family default
.
 When compiling and solving, one typically creates an instance of 
\family typewriter
test_controller
\family default
.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Model mixture only defines new variables 
\family typewriter
y[components]
\family default
 and one equation that says their sum is unity.
 Model molar_stream introduces new variables 
\family typewriter
Ftot
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
f[components]
\family default
.
 It also introduces an instance of the model mixture, which it calls 
\family typewriter
state
\family default
.
 Finally it introduces locally the equations 
\family typewriter
f_def
\family default
, one for each component.
 Models 
\family typewriter
mixer
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
reactor
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
flash
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
splitter
\family default
 introduce their own local variables and equations.
 Each also defines it input and output streams as instances of the model
 
\family typewriter
molar_stream
\family default
.
 Model 
\family typewriter
flowsheet
\family default
 contains a 
\family typewriter
mixer
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
reactor
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
flash
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
splitter
\family default
, etc.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Assume you have just written a set of models, such as those in 
\family typewriter
simple_fs.a4c
\family default
.
 In this approach you should start with the lowest level models - i.e., the
 ones that only introduce (using 
\family typewriter
IS_A
\family default
 statements) new variables and new parts that are instances of types in
 existing ASCEND libraries.
 The lowest level model by this definition is 
\family typewriter
mixture
\family default
.
 It only introduces new variables and one new equation.
 Once you have written and debugged a 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method for 
\family typewriter
mixture
\family default
, then again look for any model that only introduces new variables and local
 equations and/or parts for which a debugged 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method exists.
 The model 
\family typewriter
molar_stream
\family default
 is such a model and can be considered next.
 It introduces a part which is an instance of 
\family typewriter
mixture
\family default
 for which we already have a 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method.
 Once we have a debugged 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method for 
\family typewriter
molar_stream
\family default
, then we can consider any of the models 
\family typewriter
mixer
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
reactor
\family default
, 
\family typewriter
flash
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
splitter
\family default
 - they only have parts that are instances of 
\family typewriter
molar_stream
\family default
.
 After creating and debugging their 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 methods, we can consider the model 
\family typewriter
flowsheet
\family default
, then 
\family typewriter
controller
\family default
, then 
\family typewriter
test_flowsheet
\family default
 and finally 
\family typewriter
test_controller
\family default
.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The safest way to set 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 flags is first to clear all the 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 flags for a model instance by running the method 
\family typewriter
ClearAll
\family default
.
 The method 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 does 
\series bold
not
\series default
 run 
\family typewriter
ClearAll
\family default
, but we always write our 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 methods assuming 
\family typewriter
ClearAll
\family default
 has just been run and thus that all 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 flags are set to false.
 The following steps will aid you to write, almost automatically, a 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method that fixes the correct number of 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 flags.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Find all locally defined solver variables (of type 
\family typewriter
solver_var
\family default
 - e.g., 
\family typewriter
y[components]
\family default
 are of type 
\family typewriter
fraction
\family default
 which is of type 
\family typewriter
solver_var
\family default
).
 In mixture, the statement 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset


\family typewriter
y[components] IS_A fraction;
\family default

\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 introduces new 
\family typewriter
solver_var
\family default
s, one for each element in the set 
\family typewriter
components
\family default
.
 Let us assume there are 
\family typewriter
nc
\family default
 such elements.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Find locally introduced equations.
 In 
\family typewriter
mixture
\family default
, there is one such equation that says the variables 
\family typewriter
y
\family default
 add up to one.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Find all new parts that are instances of previously defined types.
 In 
\family typewriter
mixture
\family default
, there are no new parts.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
You must set 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 flags locally equal in number to the number of new locally defined 
\family typewriter
solver_var
\family default
s minus the number of new locally defined equations.
 In 
\family typewriter
mixture
\family default
 you must write set one 
\family typewriter
fixed
\family default
 flag to true for all but one of the components as there are 
\family typewriter
nc
\family default
 new locally introduced variables and one new locally introduced equation.
 The 
\family typewriter
CHOICE
\family default
 function arbitrarily selects one element of the set (in set theory, you
 cannot identify a set element as being first, another as second, etc, so
 for purity's sake, we only give you the option of letting ASCEND pick one
 arbitrarily).
 Thus we set all 
\family typewriter
nc
\family default
 flags and then clear one.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
You must run the 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method for each new part.
 Here there are none.
 Running specify will guarantee each part is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

square
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 - i.e., after being run, the part will not alter the number of degrees of
 freedom for the current model definition.
 However, the same 
\family typewriter
solver_var
\family default
 may get fixed in two or more different parts if those parts share that
 
\family typewriter
solver_var
\family default
, and you will have to discover this sharing and add special statements
 to correct this type of multiple setting of the same flag.
 This discovery will best be done by compiling an instance of the type and
 using the Find By Type tool in the Browser.
 Its default setting is to find all 
\family typewriter
solver_vars
\family default
 with 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 equal to 
\family typewriter
TRUE
\family default
, exactly what you need to aid you with this task.
 You may also wish to change in minor ways the flag setting that the parts
 do to suit the needs of the current type definition - you may wish to free
 
\family typewriter
temperature
\family default
 and fix 
\family typewriter
pressure
\family default
 for a stream, for example, when the stream is part of a higher level model.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Look now at the 
\family typewriter
molar_stream
\family default
 model.
 Running 
\family typewriter
ClearAll
\family default
 for an instance of 
\family typewriter
molar_stream
\family default
 will clear all the 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 flags for it and all its parts.
 It introduces 
\family typewriter
Ftot
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
f[components]
\family default
 as local new solver variables.
 It also introduces one new equation for each component, one less than the
 number of new variables.
 Finally it introduces a new part called 
\family typewriter
state
\family default
.
 We have partitioned the 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method into two methods here for 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

chemical engineering reasons,
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 one of which runs the other.
 Think of what the two of them accomplish as the 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method we wish to create.
 First we run the 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method for the new part: 
\family typewriter
state
\family default
.
 That will set the 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 flags for 
\family typewriter
nc-1
\family default
 of the variables 
\family typewriter
state.y[components]
\family default
.
 Then, as there is one more variable than equation in this model, we must
 set a net of one added 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 flag.
 We accomplish this by first clearing all the flags for the variables 
\family typewriter
state.y[components]
\family default
 -- one of which was already clear -- and then fixing all the variables
 
\family typewriter
f[components]
\family default
.
 We cleared 
\family typewriter
nc-1
\family default
 flags and set 
\family typewriter
nc
\family default
 for a net of one new flag being set.
 For our 
\family typewriter
molar_stream
\family default
 model, we would prefer that the variables 
\family typewriter
f[components]
\family default
 are the ones we fix.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Lastly, look at the 
\family typewriter
reactor
\family default
 model.
 We introduce 
\family typewriter
nc+1
\family default
 new variables: 
\family typewriter
stoich_coef[feed.components]
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
turnover
\family default
.
 We also introduce 
\family typewriter
nc
\family default
 new equations.
 Lastly we introduce two parts 
\family typewriter
feed
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
out
\family default
, which are 
\family typewriter
molar_stream
\family default
s.
 The 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method, again a combination of 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
seqmod
\family default
, must set a net of one new 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 flag.
 The way it does it is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

tricky
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 but not difficult to follow.
 In 
\family typewriter
seqmod
\family default
, we fix 
\family typewriter
turnover
\family default
 and all 
\family typewriter
nc
\family default
 of the variables 
\family typewriter
stoich_coef
\family default
.
 We seem to have fixed 
\family typewriter
nc
\family default
 too many.
 In 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
, which first runs 
\family typewriter
seqmod
\family default
, we only run the 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method for 
\family typewriter
feed
\family default
 and 
\series bold
not
\series default
 the 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method for 
\family typewriter
out
\family default
.
 We know that not running the 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method for 
\family typewriter
out
\family default
, a 
\family typewriter
molar_stream
\family default
 as we just discussed above, will leave us with 
\family typewriter
nc
\family default
 
\family typewriter
.fixed
\family default
 flags not set.
 So we deviously traded these flags for those belonging to 
\family typewriter
stoich_coef
\family default
, giving us a net of fixing one flag.
 If we had abided by all the steps above, we would have run the 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method for 
\family typewriter
out
\family default
, then gone in and cleared the flags for 
\family typewriter
out.f[components]
\family default
 while setting those for 
\family typewriter
stoich_coef[components]
\family default
 in trade to get the flags we want set for this model.
 We did the equivalent with a shortcut.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If a model is parametric, the models defined by 
\family typewriter
WILL_BE
\family default
 in the parameter list should be viewed as new variables defined in the
 model.
 Remember 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 must fix sufficient variables to make an instance of this model square.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At each of the above steps, pay special attention to indexed variables used
 in 
\emph on
indexed
\emph default
 equations
\begin_inset Note Note
status collapsed

\begin_layout Standard
need a cross reference here to the appropriate part of the manual
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 Frequently you must fix or free 
\family typewriter
n
\family default
 or 
\family typewriter
n-1
\family default
 variables indexed over a set of size 
\family typewriter
n
\family default
, if there are 
\family typewriter
n
\family default
 matching equations.
 In general, if you think you have 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 correctly written, change the sizes of all the sets in your MODEL by one
 and then by two members.
 If your 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method still works, you are probably using sets correctly.
 Pursuing 'symmetry', i.e.
 the identical treatment of all variables defined in a single array, usually
 helps you write 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 correctly.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When writing models that combine parts which do not share very well, or
 which both try to compute the same variable in different ways, it may even
 be necessary to write a 
\family typewriter
WHEN
\family default
 statement to selectively 'turn off' the conflicting equations or model
 fragments.
 An object or equation 
\family typewriter
USE
\family default
d in any 
\family typewriter
WHEN
\family default
 statement is turned off by default and becomes a part of the solved 
\family typewriter
MODEL
\family default
 only when the condition of some 
\family typewriter
CASE
\family default
 that 
\family typewriter
USE
\family default
s that object is matched.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The setting of boolean, integer, and symbol variables that are controlling
 conditions of 
\family typewriter
WHEN
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
SWITCH
\family default
 statements should be done in the 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There is no 'one perfect' 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method for all purposes.
 This routine should merely define a reasonably useful base configuration
 of the model.
 Other 
\family typewriter
specify_whatElseYouWant
\family default
 methods can also be written.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section

\family typewriter
METHOD values
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{values}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In a final application 
\family typewriter
MODEL
\family default
, you should record at least one set of input values (values of the fixed
 variables and guesses of key solved-for variables) that leads to a good
 solution.
 This facilitates testing of the model, and helps the next person using
 your model to be assured that it works as expected.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Summary
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Marginal
status collapsed

\begin_layout Standard
adding our standard methods to a model definition
\end_layout

\end_inset

We have defined a set of standard methods for ASCEND models which we insist
 a modeler provide before we will allow a model to be placed in any of our
 model libraries.
 These are listed in Table 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{tab:methods.stdMethodReqd}

\end_inset


\noun off
.
 As should be evident from above, not all models must have associated methods;
 our first vessel model did not.
 It is simply our policy that models in our libraries must have these methods
 to promote model reuse and to serve as examples of best practices in mathematic
al modeling.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Float table
wide false
sideways false
status open

\begin_layout Caption
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{tab:methods.stdMethodReqd}

\end_inset

Standard methods required for types in our ASCEND model library 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Tabular
<lyxtabular version="3" rows="8" columns="2">
<features islongtable="true">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="true" width="4in">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
method
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
description
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard

\family typewriter
default_self
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
a method called automatically when any simulation is compiled to provide
 default values and adjust bounds for any locally created variables which
 may have unsuitable defaultsin their ATOM definitions.
 Usually the variables selected are those for which the model becomes ill-behave
d if given poor initial guesses or bounds (e.g., zero).
 This method should include statements to run the default_self method for
 each of its locally created (IS_A'd) parts.
 This method should be written first.
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard

\family typewriter
ClearAll
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
a method to set all the fixed flags for variables in the type to FALSE.
 This puts these flags into a known standard state -- i.e., all are FALSE.
 All models inherit this method from the base model and the need to rewrite
 it is very, very rare.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard

\family typewriter
specify
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
a method which assumes all the 
\family typewriter
fixed
\family default
 flags are currently 
\family typewriter
FALSE
\family default
 and which then sets a suitable set of fixed flags to 
\family typewriter
TRUE
\family default
 to make an instance of this type of model well-posed.
 A well-posed model is one that is square (
\begin_inset Formula $n$
\end_inset

 equations in 
\begin_inset Formula $n$
\end_inset

 unknowns) and solvable.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard

\family typewriter
reset
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
a method which first runs the 
\family typewriter
ClearAll
\family default
 method and then the 
\family typewriter
specify
\family default
 method.
 We include this method because it is very convenient.
 We only have to run one method to make any simulation well-posed, no matter
 how its fixed flags are currently set.
 All models inherit this method from the base model, as with 
\family typewriter
ClearAll
\family default
.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard

\family typewriter
values
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
a method to establish typical values for the variables we have fixed in
 an application or test model.
 We may also supply values for some of the variables we will be computing
 to aid in solving a model instance of this type.
 These values are ones that we have tested for simulation of this type and
 found good.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard

\family typewriter
bound_self
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
a method to update the 
\family typewriter
.upper_bound
\family default
 and 
\family typewriter
.lower_bound
\family default
 value for each of the variables.
 ASCEND solvers use these bound values to help solve the model equations.
 This method should bound locally created variables and then call 
\family typewriter
bound_self
\family default
 for every locally created (
\family typewriter
IS_A
\family default
'd) part.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard

\family typewriter
scale_self
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\begin_layout Standard
a method to update the 
\family typewriter
.nominal
\family default
 value for each of the variables.
 ASCEND solvers will use these nominal values to rescale the variable to
 have a value of about one in magnitude to help solve the model equations.
 This method should re-scale locally created variables and then call 
\family typewriter
scale_self
\family default
 for every locally created (
\family typewriter
IS_A
\family default
'd) part.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Method writing automation 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:methods.automation}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Marginal
status collapsed

\begin_layout Standard
Hit the button Library/Edit/Suggest methods and tweak the results
\end_layout

\end_inset

ASCEND will help you write the standard methods.
 Writing most of the standard methods can be nearly automated once the declarati
ve portion of the model definition is written.
 Usually, however, some minor tweaking of the automatically generated code
 is needed.
 In the Library window, the Edit menu has a "Suggest methods" button.
 Select a model you have written and read into the library, then hit this
 button.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the Display window will appear a good starting point for the standard
 methods that you have not yet defined.
 This starting point follows the guidelines in this chapter.
 It saves you a lot of typing but it is a starting point only.
 Select and copy the text into the model you are editing, then tailor it
 to your needs and finish the missing bits.
 The comments in the generated code can be deleted before or after you copy
 the text to your model file.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If you have suggestions for general improvements to the generated method
 code, please mail them to us and include a sample of what the generated
 code ought to look like before the user performs any hand-editing.
 We aim to create easily understood and easily fixed method suggestions,
 not perfect suggestions, because procedural code style tastes vary so widely.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Note
status open

\begin_layout Standard
Closing the chapter you find below the suggested methods ASCEND generates
 for the ***vessel*** model.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
