#LyX 1.4.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 245
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass book
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\papersize a4paper
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 2
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 2
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes true
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
Starting Points
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{cha:Overview}

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Our goal
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The purpose of this chapter is to help you find out what you need to read
 first about ASCEND IV in order to accomplish some portion of your mathematical
 modeling tasks.
 Since there is no single best order to learn in for all people, we list
 the introductory documents and their sound bytes concisely, in the hope
 that this makes your search task less difficult.
 If ASCEND IV is new to you, work through the first three listed in sequence,
 then branch to the special topics you need most.
 Without further ado, your goals.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Primal Subjects
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter\InsetSpace ~

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cha:model1}

\end_inset

 Building and solving a small mathematical model from a simple problem descripti
on of a water tank.
 This is basic mathematical modeling of a physical system.
 If you have never, ever used ASCEND IV, you should probably start here
 to build and solve a model.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter\InsetSpace ~

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cha:model2}

\end_inset

 Making any model easier to share with others by adding basic methods, scripts,
 and model interfaces.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter\InsetSpace ~

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cha:model3}

\end_inset

 Reusing a model for plotting and case studies with an introduction to type
 refinement and inheritance.
 Defining and executing a case study to generate data and plots which indicate
 how your mathematical model responds to alternative input values.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter\InsetSpace ~

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cha:require}

\end_inset

 Managing modeling project files with REQUIRE and PROVIDE.
 ASCEND will automatically load the other type definition files you need
 when working on a model if you follow some simple rules.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter\InsetSpace ~

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cha:plot}

\end_inset

 Defining a plot which gathers scattered data from your models into a plt_plot
 that can be viewed from the Browser window.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
*howto-specify*\InsetSpace ~
 (Art,Ben, in progress) Defining a square or well-posed problem
 when your model gets big.
 Writing a specify method is the only reliable way to go, and even this
 is not simple unless you plan ahead.
 Degrees of freedom can be tricky.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter\InsetSpace ~

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cha:atoms}

\end_inset

 Defining new types of variables or constants when the standard library
 does not have what you want.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter\InsetSpace ~

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cha:dimeqns}

\end_inset

 Entering correlation equations with units and how we support degrees Farenheit.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter\InsetSpace ~

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cha:units}

\end_inset

 Defining new units of measure based on SI or other existing units.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
*howto-library1* (NOTES, check methods, etc) Getting it right the first
 time.
 Modeling reliably in teams requires communicating all problem aspects including
 the goals to be met, the mathematical problem to be solved, the solution
 process, and the testing criteria that define an acceptable solution.
 You can do all these in ASCEND IV.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter\InsetSpace ~

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cha:methods}

\end_inset

 Making basic models easy to use later by adding METHODS.
 Defining more standard methods and your own methods so you do not have
 to remember how you made the model work yesterday, last week, last year,
 or in your last incarnation.
 Its almost automatic.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Engineering Subjects
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter\InsetSpace ~

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cha:physprops}

\end_inset

 Defining a chemical mixture and physical property calculations for use
 in process simulation.
 Equilibrium thermodynamics, phases, species, and all that jazz.
 Adding species and correlations to the database.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
*howto-column1*\InsetSpace ~
 (Art, in progress) Defining a steady-state distillation
 column in a flowsheet using the column library that comes with ASCEND IV.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
*howto-reactor*\InsetSpace ~
 (Duncan, in progress) Defining a chemical reactor model
 in a flowsheet.
 Not a task for the faint of heart, but probably far easier than defining
 a new reactor in almost any commercial simulator.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter\InsetSpace ~

\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cha:ivp}

\end_inset

 Defining a simple dynamic model (initial value problem) and watching it
 respond.
 Water level in a tank.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
*howto-dynamic2*\InsetSpace ~
 (Duncan, in progress) Defining a complex dynamic model
 using dynamic libraries.
 Dynamic vapor-liquid flash tank.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
*howto-column2*\InsetSpace ~
 (Duncan, in progress) Simulating a dynamic distillation
 column in a flowsheet using ASCEND.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
*howto-control*\InsetSpace ~
 (Duncan, in progress) Controlling dynamic systems, disturbances,
 and all those pesky graphing tools using the Script window and Tcl.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter\InsetSpace ~
 Writing a conditional model where which equations apply is determined
 by variable values or boundary expressions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Description
Chapter\InsetSpace ~
 (Ben, in progress) Defining a dynamic model with end-point conditions
 (boundary value problem) using our collocation (bvp) library.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
